Block Storage
   Low latecny storage for each hose.
   Direct-attached storage (DAS)
   Storage Area Network (SAN)
   EBS Elastic Block Storage attaches to EC2 , requires OS or application to manage storage access
File Storage
   Shared File storage uses Network Attached Storage (NAS)
   File storage for large conent repository , development environment , media stores or home directory
   5 different services , 2 categories
       Amazon native file storage
       Amazon FSx(file-system-x)
   Can create self managed file share using EC2 instances attached EBS
      1. Amazon Elastic File System (Amazon EFS) - multi-az file storage that uses NFS access protocol
      2. Amazon FSx for Lustre built using Lustre file system designed for High performance computing and ML workloads. uses POSIX-compliance access protocol
      3. Amazon FSx for Windows File Server  , build using Windows File Server. Access protocol is SMB designed for Microsoft applications and windows workloads
      4. Amazon FSx for Netapp ONTAP uses NetApp ONTAP operating system provides both Netapp Block and file storage access protocol iSCSI for block storag , NFS and SMB for file storage
      5. Amazon FSx for OpenZFS fully managed shared file storage built on OpenZFS file system. Can migrate on-prem OpenZFS storage to Amazon OpenZFS storage with minimal effort , uses same access protocol.
Object Storage
    Cloud Native application typicall uses object storage for scale and metadata characteristic
    Importing of existing data stores for analytics , backup and archive
    Amazon Simple Storage Service (S3) comes with different storage class or tiers. stores snapshots and backup of data stored in other storage services such as EBS and EFS

Edge and hybrid Cloud Storage Services
    edge computing and storage solutions for remote or disconnected locations and hybrid solutions to connect on-prem infrastructure to storage services on AWS Cloud

        EDGE - local compute and storage
             includes AWS Snow family of products
                   1. AWS Snowcball Edge
                      a. Snowball edge , edge computing , data migration and edge storage device
                          Benefits : data collection , machine learning and processing , storage for intermittent connectivity
                      a.1) Options Storage Optimised , high storage capacity
                             Compute Optimised , more available vCPU with lower storage capacity
                  2. AWS Snowcone 
                      a. smallest member of snow family
                          ruggedized , secure and purpose built for use outside of traditional data center
                  3. AWS Snowmobile service
                         a. exabyte-scale data transfer service move large data to AWS
                         b. Can transfer up to 100 PB per snowmobile , 45-foot long reggedised shipping container pulled by semitrailer truck
                         c. Can migrate a complete data center
   Hybrid
           on-prem cloud storage as part of Outpost implementation utilising EBS and S3 storage service
           on-prem gateways - provides integration of on-prem IT environment with AWS Storage infrastructure
                    use cases :  move backups to cloud , use on-prem file share backed by cloud storage , provide low latency access to data in AWS for on-prem applicaitons (local caching for read and writes , improve latency)
              Storage Gateway types
                   1. Amazon S3 File Gateway : connect to cloud to store application data files and backup images offers SMB and NFS based access with local caching on Amazon S3
                   2. Amazon FSx File Gateway:  for Windows File server , unstructured or file data eithe SMB-based or business application requires on-prem access to meet low latency requirements
                   3. Volume Gateway : iSCSI block storage for on-prem application , stores and manages on-prem data in Amazon S3. Operates in cache mode or stored mode
                   4. Tape Gateway : replaces physical tapes on-prem with virtual tapes in AWS , does not change existing backup workflow. Support all leading backup applications and caches virtual tapes for low latency data access

 Data transfer and Migration services
          Designed to copy and transfer on-prem data to  and from the core AWS storage services in the AWS Cloud
                  1. File transfer service (AWS Transfer Family)
                      a. Fully secure file transfer directly to into S3 or EFS
                      b. Supported protocols  : Secure File Transfer Protocol (SFTP) , File Transfer Protocol (FTP)  , File Transfer Protocol over SSL (FTPS)
                      c. Migrates the file transfer to AWS without the change in the application
                      d. Integrates with authentication system
                      e. Provides DNS routing with Route 53
                  2. Data Syncronisation and online service (DataSync)
                      a. Online data transfer , simplifies , automate and accelerates
                      b. Moves data between on-prem and aws storage services 
                           b.1) Migrate active datasets
                           b.2) Archive data to AWS for cost saving
                           b.3) Replicate data for business continuity
                           b.4) Transfer data to cloud for analytics and processing
                   3. DataSync integrates with
                         NFS share  , SMB Shares , selft managed object store , AWS Snowcone , S3 , EFS and FSx for Windows service file system
                   4. Offline data transfer  : AWS Snow Family
                   5. Migration Services
                       Application Migration Services (AWS MGN) includes CloudEndure migration (Lift and Shift [Rehost] )
                       AWS MGN continuously replicates source server to AWS Account , once ready to migrate in automatically converts and launches server on AWS 

 Data Protection Services
           provides data redundancy and disaster requirement needs. Offers stand alone options and integrated core storage services
                   1. Backup and Archive (AWS Backup)
                       centralise and automate data protection account AWS services , fully managed policy based service
                       supports regulatory compliance , business policy for data protection
                       Organization deployment supports central policies for data protection (Configure , manage and govern backup activities)
                       Supported resources that can use AWS Backup :  EC2 , EBS , RDS, DynamoDB , Neptunes , DocumentDB , EFS , FSx , Storage Gateway Volumes  , S3 and VMware Cloud
                    2. Snapshot
                        Create backup compies of your data , stored in S3
                        Incremental copies of data
                    3. Replication can be implemented between Availability Zone withing AWS Region or between AWS Regions supported services S3 , RDS 
                    4. Disaster recovery service (CloudEndure Disaster Recovery)
                         service for on-prem server and application
                         continuosly replicate your on-prem workload into aws staging area in your AWS account with preferred region
                         replication includes : operation system , system state configuration , databases , applications and files
                         during recovery you can instruct automatic launch on the aws account




      
